Thanks everyone for joining us.
Welcome to R-Ladies Rome.
This is our February event.
So Raffaella, our organizer, will take care of us.
So I introduce the chapter
and then we leave the floor to Isabella Velazquez.
Thank you.
Hello everyone.
It's a pleasure to have you all here.
R-Ladies Rome presents Interactive R, Python, and Shiny
into the Browser with Quarto and Shinylive.
The speaker we have, Isabella Velazquez.
I'm waiting.
Okay.
Exclaimer.
This talk is recorded and will be posted
on YouTube of R-Ladies Rome.
Feel free to turn off your cameras
if you don't want to be recorded.
Here we ensure safe, inclusive,
and harassment-free space is our priority.
We are committed to promoting respectful environment
where everyone feels welcome to learn, connect, and grow.
Please remember that all of our attendees
are expected to adhere our code of conduct.
Use your chat for introducing yourself
and ask questions or raise your hand.
Hello everyone.
I'm happy to welcome you to our February event.
I'm Rafaela, R-Ladies Rome organizer,
and we are thrilled to have you join us today.
Get ready for engaging and informative experience.
What to expect from this talk?
In this talk, Isabella Velazquez will introduce Quarto Live
and ShinyLive, tools that enable interactive R
in Python and Shiny.
Applications to run directly to the browser,
no server required.
You will learn about create interactive documents,
dashboards, and educational content.
Expect hands-on demonstration,
gain insights on how enhance reproducibility,
accessibility, and engagement.
Just to remember to all of us, what is R-Ladies?
It's a global community with a mission
to promoting the R language for empowering women
at all user levels by building
a collaborative global network.
It was a friendly community founded by 2012
by Gabriela de Queiroz in San Francisco.
And R-Ladies, a local chapter dedicated
to promoting inclusivity in R language community.
Our monthly meetings provide a platform
to discuss the current trends and hot topics in R.
R-Ladies in numbers.
R-Ladies Rome has grown into a widely recognized community.
Since January, 2023, we have welcomed over 1K members
on meetup and gained 2K of RSVPs
and successfully organized 25 events.
The founders and organizer of the chapter
is Claudio Vitolo, founder, co-founder of R-Ladies Global.
And the organizer is Frederica Gasolani
and me, Rafael Ribeiro Lucas.
If you are interested in speaking at one of our events
or would be like to propose a speaker or a workshop,
please scan the QR code and fill up the form.
This one, R-Ladies.
And if you'd like to contribute to our chapter
and be a co-organizer, we are open to new persons.
Please subscribe to the form.
And the next future speakers will be Kylie Ansevly,
PhD in infectious disease modeling,
senior researcher and Claudio Vitolo,
scientist and developer in open science advocates
related to the story of R-Ladies Global.
So without further ado,
we are thrilled to have with us Isabella Velasquez,
senior product marketing manager at PositPVC,
where she merges content strategy, data analysis
and programming to showcase
the incredible work happening at Posit.
She is passionate about advocate for open source,
always exploring new tools to empower data scientists.
Today, she will talk about,
through part of life and shiny life,
showing how we can create fully interactive browser
based on R and Python applications without a server.
Let's give a warm welcome to Isabella.
Thank you so much for the introduction, Rafael,
and thanks to you and Federico for the opportunity.
I'm happy to start sharing my screen.
Can you see it okay?
All right, and let me get full screen.
All right.
Well, hi everyone.
Thank you so, so much for being here.
I'm really excited to chat with you today
about a ton of really, really amazing tools.
And I hope that you learned something new today.
I know that I certainly did as I was writing out this talk.
And just a quick aside,
this is a photo from the James Webb Telescope.
We won't be talking about this kind of web today,
but another kind of web that I hope
you also find very exciting.
As Rafael mentioned, my name is Isabella Velasquez.
I'm Senior Product Marketing Manager at Posit,
which was formerly RStudio.
And one of the things that I absolutely love
about working at Posit is that I get a front row seat
at the new things that are being developed
and being put out for data scientists working in R,
Python, or other sorts of languages.
And so when Federica reached out about a talk,
like I was very excited about this one
because I feel like there's so many new capabilities
and possibilities that I'm really excited to share with you.
So I am very active on social media.
Here's the various links.
If you'd like to reach out on LinkedIn or Blue Sky,
please do let me know.
And with that, let's get started.
So picture this.
The first day of class,
you have prepared all of your materials,
you have your lecture ready,
you've sent out the assignment,
and then a student comes up to you and says,
Professor, I tried installing R,
but my laptop keeps running out of space.
Or you're at work and you have created
this amazing dashboard that your stakeholders
will find extremely valuable.
But then you go to your boss and you say,
you know, I created this amazing thing,
but IT is taking forever to approve the server request.
And so you can't share it at that time.
Or another scenario,
because your organization doesn't have a server,
you're like, okay, well,
maybe my colleague and I can collaborate
and work on this together
and figure out some other way that we can do this.
And you send over your GitHub repo to your colleague
and they say, I'm sorry, I don't have R set up on my laptop.
And so with all of these different scenarios,
you can imagine the idea behind the architecture,
the installation, the infrastructure
behind needing your languages or your application set up
can be quite a barrier to entry
for using these really amazing technologies.
And so that's why we are entering the world
of interactive R and Python in the browser.
So running code directly in the browser
opens the door for many new exciting uses
of data science on the web.
And the two primary technologies
that we'll be talking about is,
or we'll be talking about several technologies,
but these are brought to you thanks to WebR and Pyodide.
But before we talk about them,
let's talk about another tool called WebAssembly.
So WebAssembly, or sometimes called WASM,
is a low-level, high-performance binary instruction
and it allows compiled languages like C or C++
to run in web browsers at near native speeds.
So C and C++ code is compiled by something called Emscripten.
Emscripten takes the C or C++ code as input.
It produces WASM as a result.
And once it's in WASM,
you can run it in any browser that supports WASM,
which in modern browsers is actually most of them.
Python has had a browser solution
for a while called Pyodide.
So what Pyodide does is compiles
the Python interpreter CPython to WebAssembly
using Emscripten, and then it makes it possible
to run Python in the browser.
And relatively more recently,
now R has a similar solution with WebR.
So WebR is the WebAssembly version of R
that has been compiled to run in the browser.
It's an open-source project primarily driven by Posit,
and thanks to the amazing work of many folks,
but especially George Stagg and Lionel Henry,
it's now possible to run R code directly in a web browser
without the need of traditional servers to execute the code.
So essentially what that means
is a user can visit a website and run R code directly,
so without needing R installed on their device.
All that is required is a web host server
like Netlify or GitHub Pages.
So let's see what this actually looks like.
This is a web-based interactive R console
that's included in the WebR source repo
as a demonstration of integrating WebR
in a wider web application.
So it provides a simple R environment in your web browser
and includes things like code input,
output, code editing, file management, and graphics.
So if I click this, this is the URL,
and I can share this with others.
I could share this with you,
and you may notice it kind of looks like RStudio.
They did a really nice job designing it
so that if you are an RStudio user, it looks very familiar.
You have your console down here and your plots here,
and even though it looks like RStudio, though,
remember, this is completely being run in the browser.
There was nothing installed from our end.
There was nothing that we had to set up,
and I can do something like install packages ggplot2.
Dangerous of live coding.
There we go.
So it says installing packages,
and you'll notice it says downloading WebR package.
We'll talk a little bit more about that,
but even though it looks familiar,
again, everything is being done in the browser.
I can go up here into my R script and do library ggplot2,
run that, and then I do ggplot ntcars as x equals mpg,
ntcars as x equals mpg, y equals hp, plus geom point,
and then it produces the plot.
So it's pretty amazing.
So say you have somebody,
for whatever reason they can't install RStudio,
but they really want to learn R,
you can send them this URL,
and they can try things out on their own.
So I mentioned a bit about packages.
So in terms of PyDyed,
it includes a package manager
that allows the use of Python packages.
You can also install Python wheels
or load custom Python packages with PyDyed.
And then on the R side,
there's over 14,000 R packages available for WebR.
A bit of a caveat.
So the way that this works
is that R packages have to be compiled for Wasm.
That's why the installed package
looked a little bit different.
And so the 14,000 number comes from 14,000 R packages
that were compiled to Wasm without error,
but they haven't all necessarily been tested.
So again, just a bit of a caveat there,
but still a lot of packages are available,
especially the ones that are very popular and well-known
like tidy models and tidyverse and things like that.
So when you are installing packages,
by default, the WebR install function
will use the public repository
hosted at repos.rwasm.org.
And then say like you also want to
use your own personal package for use in WebR.
So there is a project called R Universe.
It's a project by R OpenSci
that experiments with ideas for improving the publication
and discovery of research software in R.
And R Universe builds Wasm binaries for R packages
for use in WebR applications.
So if you have a custom package,
the easiest way to get up and running
is to create an R Universe repo for your packages.
And then the system will automatically build R binaries
for different things, including WebAssembly.
And then you can use that in WebR.
And so there are other options.
There's an rwasm package and things like that,
but just wanted to highlight that is the recommended
easiest or quickest way to get started.
In terms of how to use WebR,
if you go to the WebR documentation linked here,
it's very robust and very detailed.
But if you're like me, you look at the front page
and it says, install the package, npm i WebR.
And you're like, okay.
And then import the WebR class.
And it has this.
And then you realize like, oh, this is JavaScript.
So what if you don't know JavaScript like me?
It's the edge.
So WebR, it doesn't seem to be as quick and easy
to use for those who do.
But if you don't, what options do you have?
And that is where Cordo comes in.
Cordo is a next generation open source publishing system.
So it is often called the next evolution
or the next generation of our markdown.
So it's expanded upon our markdown.
What we have done at Posit is taken everything
that we learned over the past 10 years
to develop a system like Cordo.
One of the things about Cordo, it's inherently multilingual.
So right now it supports R, Python, Julia and Observable,
but it's been designed so that we can add new languages
in the future.
Another thing that we've learned is R markdown
has a lot of packages that does a lot of things.
If you are an R markdown user,
you might know like use shringen if you wanna do slides
and bookdown if you wanna do books.
But Cordo has a shared expression
for all these core features.
So what that means is if you do a tab set in a Cordo book,
it looks the same as a tab set in a Cordo presentation.
And the idea behind Cordo is to create dynamic content
with Python and R and Julia and Observable.
And then another thing is it enables
single source publishing.
So the idea of creating notebooks or dashboards
or books, et cetera, from one source.
And I will say there are many great resources about Cordo.
We're not gonna talk about everything about Cordo.
At this time, I'm happy to share the resources.
I would say that the Cordo documentation site
is absolutely incredible.
It is very detailed and how to get started,
how to use Cordo.
I gave a talk a couple of years ago at R Ladies St. Louis
that I'm happy to share that went more into detail
in terms of like, you know, getting set up in R studio
and rendering documents and things like that.
But for today, I'm just going to be talking
about the most critical parts of Cordo
that you need to know in order to use WebR
and PyEdite in Cordo documents.
So first, the anatomy of a Cordo document.
So a Cordo document has an extension QMD.
The first part that we're going to talk about
is what is called the YAML heading.
So it is denoted by these three dashes
and then a key value pairs within these dashes.
So the key, for example, can be title
and the value is ggplot2-demo.
And the YAML heading contains the metadata
for your document.
So in this case, it's saying,
I want to produce an HTML format.
I can provide additional options like code full true
means like the code within the document
should collapse so that it's not immediately visible
unless somebody clicks it to open it up.
And so the YAML heading, just to reiterate,
is the kind of metadata of your document.
The next part to talk about is the markdown text.
So markdown is a lightweight way of writing formatted text
and in a way that it looks very readable.
You can do things like, for example, here in line eight,
the two pound signs mean this is a heading.
So this will be rendered as a heading.
You can do things like embed images, links, tables,
format your text, all sorts of things.
But the really nice thing about markdown
is that once you learn it, it's easily readable
when you say, put it up on GitHub.
It doesn't come out in a very nested,
difficult to read format.
It looks like text.
The next part of the next anatomy of the Cordo document
is what are called code chunks.
So those are denoted by three back ticks
and then in curly braces,
the programming language that you want.
And within this code chunk
is going to be your executable code.
So this is code that is actually going to run.
And so there are these things called code chunk options.
They're denoted by the pound sign
and then the long vertical line.
I think that is called a hash pipe.
And this provides metadata for your code chunks.
So in this case, it's saying label,
label this plot, plot penguins.
Echo is false means that you do not want to see
the actual code chunk.
All you want to do is see the output message
and warning is if this code produces a message
and warning, do not show it.
And there are other kinds of things
in terms of like handling how things are actually rendered
when you render your document from a QMD file
to say an HTML document.
And then within the code chunk is your actual code.
So in this case, you know, the library,
sorry, the packages tidyverse and palmer penguins will run.
It will create this ggplot code.
And when you click render on this document,
that code is actually going to run.
And so this is a quick look of what it looks like
when you actually hit render.
So all of that, you know, text and code
and labels that you wrote is going to output
this HTML document that looks like this.
If you notice, you can't see the code
because you said, please do not show me the code.
There's a link and everything like that
that came from the markdown text.
Another critical part for today are Cordo extensions.
So Cordo extensions let you customize
and extend Cordo's functionality
beyond its built-in features.
So things like new output formats,
so custom templates for the documents
that you want to create.
A relatively recent one is the scrolly telling extension.
So if you've ever seen those kinds of journalism articles
that as you scroll through, they highlight different plots
or different parts of a plot or things like that,
that is now possible with Cordo
thanks to the scrolly telling extension.
Another example is journal articles.
So you can install extensions.
So if you are trying to say,
like submit to the journal statistical software
so that your Cordo document renders
in the format that they require.
Things like reveal.js themes.
So presentations in Cordo are done
in a format called reveal.js.
And there are extensions out there so that you can see,
so you can customize what your reveal.js extension
will look like.
So unique styling and layouts
and all sorts of other ways of modifying
how Cordo processes content.
So one example that I have
is one that I use for the presentation today.
So there is a font awesome extension.
And how to use extensions is first you install the extension
and then a quick note,
Cordo extensions, if you go to their GitHub repo
or their documentation page,
generally have instructions as to how to install it
and how to actually use it.
So each one might be slightly different,
and so you definitely want to go
and check their documentation
if there is an extension that you want to use.
But for the font awesome extension,
you install it, you say Cordo add,
Cordo ext font awesome in the terminal.
And then in your Cordo document,
the YAML heading under, you add a filters option
and then list out the different extensions
that you want to include.
So in this case, filters font awesome.
And then to use the extension of the doc,
anywhere that I want to put, say, a GitHub icon,
I put this short code with the curly braces.
And then when I actually rendered the document,
it results in the GitHub icon.
So that's an example of a Cordo extension.
That being said, there are so many available
and here is a link to the Cordo extension gallery
by Mikhail Makhnoly.
And so if you want to search for different extensions
and see what's out there, this is a great place to start.
Another note is that Cordo extensions are Lua-based
and if you feel comfortable writing in that,
you can also make your own extensions
if there is something that you require
and you don't see out there in the wild.
So wrapping everything up,
we started off talking about WebAssembly
and how the technologies behind WebAssembly
enable Pyodai and WebR,
which allow you to run R and Python in the browser
like we saw with the web-based R console.
But to use those, you need to know JavaScript.
And so we went into a brief introduction of Cordo
because with Cordo, there is an extension called Cordo Live.
And Cordo Live allows you to embed
WebAssembly-powered code blocks
and exercises in Cordo documents
through the Cordo Live extension.
And there's support for both R via WebR
and Python via Pyodai.
And features include interactive code blocks,
exercises with hints and solutions,
and rich output like plots.
And the most important thing,
WebAssembly and Python skills are not needed
to use WebR in your content.
And I did also want to briefly mention
that originally there was an extension
by James Balamuta called Cordo WebR,
but Cordo Live is the extension
that is supported by Posit.
So let's see what this actually looks like.
So Cordo Live, again,
embeds these WebAssembly-powered blocks
for R or Python into Cordo documents.
So after a little bit,
you're going to see this editor
with a button that says run code.
And if I click this,
I have run R code in my browser
from a presentation that I created in Cordo.
It is pretty amazing.
I think it's very cool.
So another thing to note, this is an editor,
so I can change whatever I'd like.
So say I want to do one through six.
Oh, oh, sorry.
I don't know what happened.
The presentation got, I'm sorry, one second.
Here.
I am back.
Okay.
Hopefully, if you cannot see it, just let me know.
But okay, so I've changed this from one to five
to one to six.
Let's say print instead of X to the power of two,
X to the power of three.
We can run code.
And then again, it just executes that code
in the browser from my presentation.
So in terms of how to actually use this,
it's going to look very similar
to what we talked about before.
First, you install the extension in the terminal,
and then you add to your Cordo document YAML header.
If you notice, it looks slightly different.
So instead of putting it under filters,
we put it under format,
and we change it from, say, HTML to live HTML.
A quick note is by default,
the Cordo live extension uses Pyodied for Python.
So if you want to use the Cordo live extension
for NIDAR and R,
then you have to include the engine,
engine NIDAR in your YAML heading.
And then you also have to include the shortcode
that you see on line six as well.
Then to use Cordo live in a Cordo document,
you place your code in either a WebR code chunk for R
or a Pyodied code chunk for Python.
And so the chunk that you saw a little bit earlier,
this is what I have in my document
in order to create that live editor that executes code.
A note is you can use Cordo live in your presentations too.
So when you're creating a Cordo presentation,
you have format reveal JS,
and then you edit your YAML header to live reveal JS.
Another cool thing that you can do,
say, if you want to use Cordo, sorry,
Cordo live in your presentations
is you can install the Cordo drop extension.
You press the back tick,
and then this console for R or Python can drop down.
And then again, you can just start typing R code
and then execute it in real time.
And so you can imagine, say you're giving a lecture,
somebody asks like, how would you do this in R?
You can just go ahead, drop in R console,
try it out, and then lift it up
and continue on with your presentation.
In terms of other kinds of options
that are included in Cordo live,
there are things like you can create breed only cells.
So once that you can actually be edited,
nope, I didn't realize it's not full screen.
You can auto run.
So instead of needing somebody to click run code
in order to see the output, you can have it auto run.
You can have auto complete within the editor if you want,
and much more.
So recommend looking at the documentation
if you want to see all the things that are possible.
And back to the idea of installing packages,
you have a couple options here too.
You can install packages as the document loads.
So in this case, whenever somebody opens
the rendered document,
WebR is going to load dplyr,
Palmer penguins and ggplot2.
And so of course, depending on the size of your packages,
it might take a little while.
Since I had this presentation already open when we started,
there's like a little loading message
that lets me know like these packages are being loaded.
And so the run code will show up once it's ready to go.
And then another option is interactively.
So if you would rather install the packages
as and load them as you,
as your user actually goes through the document,
you can include this in your WebR or pylide chunk.
And so whenever they click run code,
that's when the package will be installed.
Well, a few more examples.
We mentioned like WebR and portal live
allows you to display plots.
So here we have this base R plot.
I can click that and then see an example plot.
And just a thing to note too,
that graphics work a bit different than normal
than they do like in regular R.
And this is because there's something called
a graphics device that implements the drawing commands
from R in the browser.
But one benefit of this is that it takes advantage
of features that exist in browsers already.
So things like fonts from other languages or emojis,
that's already built in, which is pretty cool.
Let's say I'm seeing this and I'm like,
oh, I like this plot.
Oh no, I have a typo.
I can go ahead, pick that typo,
rerun code and get a plot
that actually looks the way that I want.
Another example is creating exercises with portal live.
So you can designate a chunk as an exercise.
So this chunk says fill in the blanks
so that the result of the sum is 10.
I'm like, oh boy, I don't know what to do.
I can show a hint and then it tells me
consider subtracting one, two, three from 10.
I'm like, oh no, I still don't know.
Let's say I put five and I click run code.
It's going to tell me the output
and then let me know that's incorrect.
And say I give up, I can say show solution
and then it lets me know what the solution is.
So you can imagine for teaching,
there's a lot of different kinds of applications.
And so here is one from Klaus Wilke
on the introduction to R.
I open this up.
You'll see that Buzzer has created
this interactive document.
Here is the loading icon.
So we know like the packages are not quite ready yet,
but it seems like they are being installed
as soon as you load the document.
And then, okay, it looks like it's ready to go.
And then there's all these different exercises
that you can go through.
And if you imagine there's somebody
you're trying to teach introduction to R,
here's a great way of making things like really interactive
and without like needing that much more to set up
beyond the quarter document
that you've created for your lecture.
Another self-promotion that I wanted to give
is that I wrote this blog post
called Six Not-So-Basic Base R Functions a while back.
And a quick note that this used the Cordo WebR extension,
not Cordo Live because Cordo Live wasn't quite out yet,
but just wanted to show like essentially
the same kind of ideas.
I wanted to highlight these base R functions
and somebody could go in here and run
and see like what changes and try things out.
And then also there's an example
of what installing packages could look like.
So this, for example, is a package that's not on CRAN.
It is my older brother's package.
And so then I can designate his R universe repository
in order to install it and use it in the examples.
I know that that's a lot,
but I really hope like this conveys like the excitement
and the amazingness that I think this technology brings.
And so thanks, Adam, for this note.
I hope he's not actually weeping real tears,
but it truly is so amazing
that sometimes it feels like magic.
So we've talked about Cordo documents
and executable R chunks and things like that,
but you might be wondering, well, what about Shiny?
And if you are new to Shiny,
Shiny allows you to create web applications
without needing to know JavaScript, HTML,
or anything like that.
You can just do it in pure R or pure Python,
which is pretty amazing
if you don't know JavaScript like me.
But say you've created your Shiny dashboard,
very beautiful, ready to go.
And then you need to share it with somebody.
So the traditional Shiny architecture
for deploying a Shiny app
involves a separate server and a client.
And we've mentioned the word server several times today,
but essentially a server is a machine
that's connected to the internet
that runs 24 seven ready to run your Shiny app.
And the server runs R or Python and Shiny,
and clients connect via the web browser.
And each client keeps an open web socket connection
as long as they are using the application.
So this is like probably the simplest way that this works.
There are more complex setups,
but fundamentally this is kind of what it looks like.
And in terms of hosting Shiny apps,
there are a lot of different options
for hosting your server.
So for example, you can have RStudio server on your laptop
and say you need some scalability
or additional security for your app,
you can get Posit Connect,
which is an enterprise version from Posit
and for hosting your Shiny apps.
There are also cloud-based solutions.
Shinyapps.io has been around for a long time.
There is a new product called Posit Connect Cloud
that lets you publish Shiny
and also all sorts of kind of Python frameworks as well.
And then like things like Hugging Face,
you can roll your own if you would like.
And then in terms of choosing what the right tool is,
it's a very wide spectrum
in terms of the number of users.
For some people, we might just be sharing our apps
with one or two other people.
For other people, we might be talking thousands.
And then there are some folks in between,
like a professor, an academic,
might have a few hundred folks looking at their apps.
But what if you don't have the infrastructure
or the resources to set up either of these kind of options?
Another kind of hosting service are web hosting services.
And they offer a lot of scalability and features
and perhaps a low price point,
like GitHub Pages or Netlify or Ordo Pub,
but the issue is they can't run traditional Shiny apps.
And the reason is that these are called static web hosting.
They're very good in terms of reach and affordability.
You don't have to think about servers anymore.
So when you publish, say, a quarter website,
you just give them your rendered Porto document files.
But there is no way to run Shiny apps
on these kind of servers,
on these kind of web hosting services.
So if you've ever created a Shiny app before
and you've wanted to share it via a website,
you've probably had to embed it in an iframe
when you wanted to share it.
But that is not the only option anymore.
Thanks to Shiny Live,
anybody can create their own serverless Shiny apps
to run in the browser.
And in terms of what this looks like,
here is a very simple Shiny app.
And remember, this is a portal presentation,
and this is not an iframe.
This is embedded in the presentation itself.
And this is a Shiny app.
So I could change the number,
I can change the color,
and did not have to host this
on any kind of external server.
All it is, it's on the web.
So, I'm sorry.
Yes, Shiny Live was announced in July 2022 for Python,
September 2023 for R.
And it uses PyDyed and WebR respectively
to enable fully in-browser Shiny apps without a backend.
And so, in terms of the architecture,
all you need to run Shiny Live is these static web servers.
So when an application is deployed with Shiny Live,
R or Python and Shiny run in the web browser,
the browser is effectively both the client
and the server for the application.
And that is pretty amazing.
So you don't need a separate server to host these apps.
In terms of how to use Shiny Live, you have three options.
One is the Shiny Live online editor.
The second is you can convert a Shiny app
that you've created traditionally.
And the third is you can embed a Shiny app with Cordo.
So there is an online Shiny Live editor for R and for Python.
So let's open this up.
The editor is on the left
and you can change this app in real time.
So let's let it load.
There are several examples here,
which is very helpful if you are new to Shiny
and you want to see what it looks like
and you want to play around with it.
Here's the editor and then here is the app.
And it's a real app.
I can change this.
Number of bins change.
Similarly, I can change, say, the number of bins.
I want the max to be 500.
I can rerun the app.
And then this, instead of 50, now it's 500.
And again, I can move it around and change it.
If I were to take this code,
say I copy and pasted it into RStudio,
as long as I have all the packages installed, it would run.
And then I would see this in my viewer pane, for example.
And it, again, is one of the ways
that you can create a Shiny Live app.
In terms of sharing, up here there is a share button
and there are actually a couple of options you can use.
So say you are working with somebody
who already knows R or Python
and you want them to work on that same app,
you could do it with an editor URL.
So it'd look kind of like this.
Or say you just want to show it and not allow them to edit,
you can share the application URL.
You notice it's very long.
It's because it contains all the information
that is needed in order to create this app on the web,
but it's completely shareable.
If I sent this to you, you would open it up,
say, let's look good at what this looks like,
and it would look like this.
And then it would load on your browser
and you can edit the code
and you can play around with the app or anything like that.
Something else I wanted to know is,
I saw this question on Blue Sky recently,
was should I be using BSLib for creating Shiny apps?
And if you have not heard of BSLib before,
BSLib is kind of like the next generation package
for Shiny creation and styling.
And it aims to make these beautiful looking apps
right out of the box.
So if you've ever heard somebody say like,
oh, it looks like a Shiny app
and it needs customization and stuff like that,
BSLib aims to make it look pretty stunning
right off the bat.
So all of these are done with BSLib.
And so this is also a really great opportunity
that if you are new to BSLib,
you can kind of see how things are different,
how the layout is structured and things like that.
And there's a ton of kind of example texts
if you wanna try it out.
Going back to our presentation.
So the first option was to use the Shiny Live Online Editor.
The second is you can convert a Shiny app
that you've already written.
So if you did a dashboard with Shiny for R
or Shiny for Python,
then you install the Shiny Live package.
Then you can export the app.
So we're using the export function.
And this converts the app into a My App directory
and produces an output directory site.
And it will give you all the files
that you would need to give to a static web hosting service
in order to see your app.
And if you want to, you can also preview the app
by running this run static server function.
And then it will open up in a web browser.
So if you prefer to do something like on our studio desktop
or something like that,
and then you want to convert it
so that you can put it up on the web somewhere,
this is an option for you.
And then the final way that you can create
and share Shiny Live apps
is using the Shiny Live extension.
So you install the Cordo extension.
Again, it should look a little familiar.
And then you add it to your Cordo document YAML heading
under filters.
And then within your Cordo document,
you insert a code block with either Shiny Live Python
or Shiny Live Python.
Or Shiny Live R.
And that's it.
So like that app that you saw a little bit earlier,
this is similar to the code chunk
that I put in my presentation
in order to create a Shiny Live application
that I could edit in real time.
A few examples.
So one is the Shiny for Python docs.
So this is an example of embedding interactiveness
in documentation so that people can learn
and pick up and iterate just in real time
without having to set anything up on their own end.
So here is an example with the app.py.
You can play around with it and say,
I'm new to this, I can start messing around
and seeing how things change every time I do this.
How things change every time I rerun the app.
There are things like the components.
And I mentioned earlier, you know,
be a sliv, like say you want to see what a layout looks like
by changing things up.
You can change it in the app right there, right then.
Another example, again from Classability,
is this color picker app.
It's just another example of a Shiny Live app
that's done, that's shared in the browser.
So it's shareable through this URL
and no server required.
So say, you know, this professor has hundreds of students,
not enough bandwidth on shinyapps.io to host the Shiny app,
but on a web browser, it's absolutely doable.
And then it's also an example of a more complex example
of a Shiny app.
So really, even though it is like more complex
and it's doing a lot in the backend and things like that,
it's still runnable in the browser.
And the final example that I want to show
is Shiny Assistant.
So with the admin of AI, there's so many different ways
of embedding AI into tools.
And this one embeds AI for R or Python
through the Elmer package for R or chat list for Python
and with Shiny Live to create a Shiny Assistant.
So this is a chat bot and you can see it says,
hello, I'm Shiny Assistant.
I'm here to help you with Shiny.
Gives you some examples.
And because it's Shiny Live, again,
completely on the browser, and I can say,
could you help me make a really simple Shiny app?
And then the editor and the app shows up
here on the right-hand side.
And so like the docs or examples that you saw earlier,
this is totally editable.
This is absolutely runnable and say,
and because this is a chat bot too,
I can go back and forth.
And so I can say, could you add another visualization
please?
And here on the left, it's going to generate the code.
It's going to talk about what it's done.
It updates the editor and the app as well.
And so as you can imagine,
this is a really great way of building prototypes.
So BSLib is a really great way of getting started,
but say you have a specific layout in mind
or something like that,
and you don't want to forget a parentheses
or something like that.
You can work with Shiny Assistant to create the prototype
of what it is that you want and get it set up there.
Like before, you can share it so that, you know,
somebody can give you feedback or things like that,
or say that you've gotten to the point
that you don't want to say upload
your sensitive data up here, right?
Because this is the web.
And so instead of what you can do
is you can download the project files
and then open it up in the editor of your choice
so that you can make further modifications
and build the exact app with the data that you need.
But this is, again, possible thanks to Shiny Live
and all the advancements that there've been in AI
and the integration of AI into different tools.
And so if you haven't played around with Shiny Assistant,
I highly recommend it.
It is how I start with almost every single one
of my Shiny apps now.
Okay, so with that, let's talk about some use cases.
We've talked a lot about the technology
and possibilities and things like that.
So let's just kind of outline them.
So first of all, it's sharing interactive reports
and dashboards with executable code.
So with WebR and Pyodaj, Border Live, Shiny Live,
it provides a smooth, interactive, immediate introduction
to the world of working with data.
So users who haven't had the chance to use R
due to barriers, but because of software installation
or cloud-based service registrations
or anything like that can be introduced to R and Python
thanks to these interactive examples.
You can also create reproducible documentation
through containerization
and notebook-style literate programming.
And linked here is a article to a Nature post
about how WebAssembly is changing how research is shared.
The R Consortium Submissions Group
is a group that is working on improved practices
of R in clinical trial research.
And thanks to Shiny Live,
they have successfully submitted a pilot R Shiny app
featuring Shiny Live to the FDA for review.
And in terms of educational benefits,
again, say you're doing an intro to R Workshop,
you can dive into the code without any software.
You can remix examples on the fly.
You can have this kind of tactile educational content
with interactive experimentation for your students.
There's reduced context switching,
so they don't have to switch between the console
and the tutorial, all in all making the learning process
more streamlined and engaging.
And then for professors who want to service apps
for hundreds of people,
but don't have the computational load available to them,
this is another use case.
In terms of benefits, this idea of sharing easily,
so it shines in accessibility,
your content can be hosted
on any static web hosting service
and you can share it with just a URL.
Users can run code without installing software.
It can be run on any device or like tablets or mobile.
If you haven't seen ThinkR's R Lingo,
it's a mobile way of working with R,
so if you really want to work with R on your phone.
Oops.
Okay, so that's it.
But there are things to consider
and very important kind of decisions
that you have to make before deciding
on whether you're gonna use Corda Live and Shiny Live.
So first thing is that it's under active development
and things might change.
Some packages are not supported yet.
And depending on network access, some might just not work.
Probably most importantly,
maybe should have had this as a first bullet,
is there are no secrets to the Shiny Live apps
that's George Stagg.
So all the source code goes to the client,
all the data goes to the client.
And so because everything runs client-side,
you want to be careful what you use it for.
So be sure to never include credentials,
be sure to never include sensors,
and never include sensitive data.
And finally, for large data sets, large packages,
or really intensive tasks,
you want to be cognizant of the performance limitations
that might exist.
It might just be really, really slow
and therefore unusable to some of your audience.
So to sum up a few best practices,
you want to keep the computations lightweight
and structure code efficiently.
You want to offset these kind of performance limitations
that could exist.
You want to make sure to manage your dependencies correctly.
But really, ultimately,
it's about choosing the right tool for the job.
You know your work best, you know your data best.
There might be times where, again, Shiny Assistant
is a great time for prototyping and things like that.
But if you have a data set with real names,
that's when you download it
and pull it into something that's nice and secure
and airtight.
But if it is something like you're creating exercises,
you want to show off some cool functions in a blog post,
it might be the right tool,
and that is up to you to decide.
So really, it's a very exciting time.
I hope that you're excited, too,
and have learned some new things today
in terms of the future of interactive data science.
As Joe Chang said when he announced
Shiny Live for R at PositConf,
truly is we're exploring a new frontier.
And there are so many options that you can do
in order to leverage these tools in new formats.
And these are just examples that I came up with,
but I'm sure there's so many other options
that I cannot even dream of.
And so I'm really excited to see
how you take it and run with it.
And with that, thank you.
Very open to any questions,
and thank you again for joining me.
Thank you very much, Isabella.
So I have some questions from the chat,
I don't know if you have seen them.
I have not.
Okay, but I asked the audience
if you'd like to ask a question directly to Isabella,
please raise your hand.
While I'm reading these questions
that I've read along the way.
So the first one was,
is there a way to log in and set up an account
for the web, so the use of R in the browser?
Hmm, so let me know if I'm answering this correctly.
You don't need to log in
if you want to set up an account to use WebR,
you have to install the packages.
And again, you have like the JavaScript kind of option
if you know JavaScript,
or you have Cordo documents if you want to use that.
So all of that, you don't require a login
or anything like that.
If the question is like,
can you set up say a Cordo document with a login
to a document with WebR chunks?
I believe that is possible.
But again, just remember once,
you know, somebody gets past that login,
all those WebR chunks are still on the web
and everything like that.
So if it is something that you want
to really keep secret or private or anything like that,
that you might want to consider some other options.
Okay, so that answers the second question as well.
The third one was, does Cordo offer advantages
over using Jupyter Notebook for publishing?
Yeah, so I would say, so one advantage, for example,
is the one that you saw today.
So thanks to the Jupyter Notebook,
the one that you saw today.
So thanks to the massive universe of extensions
that Cordo offers, there are so many things
that you could do with Cordo documents
that are not possible in Jupyter Notebooks.
So if you want to create a document
with interactive chunks,
you might be able to do that with Pyedide,
but not if you're an R user.
And in terms of other kind of advantages,
I would say like there's the multilingual aspect.
Again, if you are an R and a Python user,
you don't have to switch contexts so much
to be able to use like different kind of tools.
I personally think that Cordo documents
are much more readable and user-friendly to use,
especially since Jupyter Notebooks
have kind of that JSON backend
that can be kind of tricky with version control.
Cordo, since it's markdown-based,
doesn't run into those kinds of issues.
And finally, I really like the outputs that Cordo creates.
So like the slides that you see here,
the websites, the blogs,
I just think they look really nice.
And I think like there is a huge advantage
to be able to present things that look professional
and crisp and clear.
And I think Cordo really excels in that.
Oop, I think you're unmuted.
Oh, sorry.
Yeah, thank you for answering the question.
So that was interesting to me as well.
So I wanted to, there's a full question that says,
how would you share your R document
with say someone who does not have R?
Yeah, so for example,
if you create a Cordo document with R,
code chunks, what you would do is you would share,
like you would publish that document to say GitHub pages,
to Netlify, to some sort of web host server,
and then you just share a URL.
And so, you know, if I were to share like my blog post,
for example, all of that is R.
And even if somebody's computer doesn't have R installed
or RStudio installed or any kind of editor installed,
all they need is a browser and an internet connection,
and then they can run R code.
Great, thank you.
Then we have other two questions.
I don't know if Eva would like to ask herself.
You want to ask directly to Isabella maybe?
You can unmute yourself.
Can you?
Yes, thank you.
So I'm working on a dashboard
and some of it is static.
And now I would like to have interactive part to it.
And I was trying ShinyLive already.
And is it possible, let's say I prepared the data,
I filtered, I added some calculations,
and then I want to have, let's say, interactive plot.
Can I communicate from within my R chunks
to ShinyLive chunk,
or does the whole thing have to be ShinyLive?
Yeah, so I would say you have two options.
Since they started with a Cordo dashboard,
Cordo dashboards actually do allow
using of Shiny components.
So say you want to add a sidebar
where people toggle between different colors
in their plot or something like that,
that Cordo can absolutely do that.
It is kind of in like Shiny syntax.
You have to be like, you know,
you need to be familiar with that and things like that.
But the Cordo dashboard guide on the Cordo documentation
kind of shows some examples.
And there's also a dashboard gallery with some,
you know, if you want to pull them up
and see their source code and see how they did it.
So that's one thing.
It's Cordo dashboards with Shiny components.
And then the other option is to create a Shiny app
that's hosted on, you know,
that is either ShinyLive or a traditional Shiny app.
And I think like in terms of the consideration
of like, which one do you choose?
It's one of those things that, again,
it depends on you and your data and your audience
and, you know, the resources that you have available.
If you don't want to start all over from scratch,
I would say like, you know,
try out the Shiny components in the Cordo dashboard
and see what that's like.
Or another option is if you want to try it
is to ask the Shiny assistant, right?
Like I'm creating this app or dashboard,
can you, you know, help me convert it to Shiny code
and see how it goes?
And that way you have kind of the,
like you have like the most options, right?
You could do it, you could put it on a website,
you can put it on shinyapps.io
or whatever it is that you need.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Yeah, thank you, Isabella.
Zarifa, yeah, I think everyone said it right.
Would you like to ask Isabella directly your question?
Sure, thank you, Isabella, for the presentation.
It was really helpful.
One question I have is I work with sensitive data a lot
and we do make dashboards and want to make like, you know,
if Shiny live is not the appropriate thing
to work with sensitive data,
what other servers do you suggest to use?
When like we have audiences,
outside audiences who wants to look into the dashboard,
we don't want them to have the access to any sort of data.
What do you suggest?
Yeah, so I would say,
I would suggest the ones that are listed
in the traditional Shiny architecture page,
like the, if you want on-prem,
you can spin up your own RStudio server.
If it's an enterprise solution,
and my company Posit has one that like,
it puts everything like behind the firewall.
So Posit doesn't have access to the data,
only you do, but all the apps are being hosted and,
you know, secure and have the computation
that they need to run and things like that.
If it is something that say,
like the problem with the cloud-based ones is right,
like you're still giving,
you're uploading your data to something else.
And so if it is very sensitive data,
I would say like it has to be kind of an on-prem solution.
And then Shiny live is definitely not the right one
because again, literally everything is sent
when you share a Shiny live application.
Yeah, thank you.
Usually like the data sets are smaller.
So, you know, we are always like confused,
like what to go for, like, you know,
buying something like more cloud-based
are always not an option for us with student data.
So always very confused.
Sometimes we do use like Tableau,
but again, like you cannot use outputs very easily
as you can do with shinyapps.io.
But, you know, very confusing, but thank you.
Yeah.
Another option of like on-prem, you know,
generally at an organization like IT,
you need to set the server and everything like that.
One other kind of solution that I've seen
is you build like the app itself
and say you put data on shinyapps.io
or PositConnect Cloud or something like that.
But you can also use like a cloud-based solution
like shinyapps.io or PositConnect Cloud
or something like that,
but you don't put the actual data.
So in one of the examples in the Shiny Live documentation,
it shows how to like upload a CSV, say, to a shiny app.
So you kind of build the structure of a shiny app
and then the plot that it would produce,
say, from the data,
but you don't actually put the data
and then you share that app
and then people upload their own data,
you know, whenever they need to use it.
But I would say like the issue with that is like
it's not very scalable.
The dataset has to be formatted correctly.
Like so there are a lot of like kind of roadblocks
that could happen if you try to share it that way.
And so something that's on-prem
is probably, you know, worth it to investigate and set up.
Oh, I haven't thought about it.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Great.
Thank you very much.
I don't see any other questions,
just a comment from Iris.
She said, I've used Markdown
and static web pages for search docs
and familiar with YAML.
So she's happy with these tools and she's done.
Hi, Isabella.
Can you hear me?
Yes.
Hi.
Oh, yeah.
I'm Iris.
I've been a technical writer for years
and I've used all sorts of tools.
I'm very excited about what you presented today
in terms of dynamic information and content
and the whole interactive part of it.
So I look forward to exploring this and see what I can do.
I wanted to update my portfolio.
And now I have a way to do it.
So this is going to be an interesting, juicy project for me.
Thanks.
I'm so glad to hear.
And I hope, you know, it's a joyful experience.
Thanks very much.
Thanks for joining us.
Thanks, Isabella.
I know that you're busy now,
so we won't take your time away from your busy tasks.
So, Raffaella, thank you very much.
Yeah.
We look forward to see many of you to our next event on March.
We will let you know soon what is going to happen.
And so thanks again, Isabella.
Your talk is amazing as always.
It's always a pleasure to have you.
And so you always give very interesting insights
that always says something that, you know, something new,
which is very key and very important.
So thank you again.
And I hope I see you soon.
You are all very welcome to join us.
And follow us on our social network, please.
Follow our Ladies' Room.
Bye.
Bye now.
Thanks all.